Datasnakes Mini-Tutorial
========================
Datasnakes has been built with Python 3.6 as a pipeline framework for current
(comparative genetics for orthologous genes), and future (RNA-seq) bioinformatic data analysis.
Currently, this python package is comprised of 4 major modules:
1.  Cookies - Deploys directory structures using cookiecutter.
2.  Manager - Pipeline configuration and management.
3.  Tools - Established and developed utility tools.
4.  Orthologs - Pipeline generation for comparative genetics.

When used together, these 4 modules offer a cohesive environment for easily creating,
managing, and deploying a bioinformatics pipeline for orthologous genes/species.  In the future
these tools will also be accessible from the command line and from a web application.

READMEs are provided in each module's directory, but we've compiled a mini tutorial here
that can inform users on how to use these modules.

Using the Cookies module
------------------------
#### Overview
The Cookies module acts as a repository for custom [cookiecutter](https://github.com/audreyr/cookiecutter) templates.  

Each "Cookie" allows us to quickly create and deploy different projects with various directory structures.  They are meant to help organize projects
and data in a standardized way.  This module is used almost extensively by the Manager module.

In the context of the Manager module the Cookie class is used to deploy an entire repository geared towards developing a web-page using Flask and R-Shiny.
Cookies can also be used to create standalone projects that don't require an entire repository.

#### TODO - After creating a cookie class, add real examples here.
#### Examples
* Templates used when creating a full repository:
  * _Cookies/new_repository_
  * _Cookies/new_user_
  * _Cookies/new_project_
  * _Cookies/new_research_
  * _Cookies/new_database_ (for NCBI, proprietary, etc. databases)
  * _Cookies/new_app_ (for [R-Shiny](https://github.com/grabear/awesome-rshiny) applications)
  * _Cookies/new_website_ (for [Flask](http://flask.pocoo.org/) applications)

* Template for standalone projects
  * _Cookies/new_basic_project_

Using the Manager module
--------------
#### Overview
The Manager module uses the Cookie class in order to deploy a bioinformatics repository
with an organized directory structure based on specific users and the projects that they create.
Pipeline customization and configuration will also be possible through YAML files.

#### Future Direction
First, a database_management class for dealing with the various databases (NCBI, BioSQL, etc.) will be developed.
Then the Management class will become responsible for functioning alongside Flask in order to create a web interface.
The web interface will give each user access to the Tools and Orthologs modules as well as data generated by the pipeline functionality.

#### Examples
```python
# Manager classes can be used explicitly, or...
from Datasnakes.Manager.management import Management
from Datasnakes.Manager.management import RepoManagement
from Datasnakes.Manager.management import UserManagement
from Datasnakes.Manager.management import WebsiteManagement
from Datasnakes.Manager.management import ProjectManagement

# ...they can be use implicitly through the main pipeline class.
from Datasnakes.Manager.data_management import DataMana

# Use a prebuilt configuration file in Manager/config/
# *start* a *new* project automatically
import os
pipeline = DataMana(pipeline='Ortho_CDS_1', project_path=os.getcwd(), start=True, new=True)
```
Using the Orthologs Modules
----------------
#### Overview
The Orthologs module is the central data processing unit of our package.  Any published data will be generated using these submodules.

The sub modules are used for BLASTing NCBI's refseq database to discover orthologous genes, 
parsing and analyzing BLASTn data, generating GenBank files for the orthologs, generating sequence data
for the orthologs, aligning the orthologous sequences for each gene, generating phylogenetic trees for each gene, 
and doing phylogenetic analysis for each gene.

#### Examples
```python
from Datasnakes.Manager.management import ProjectManagement
from Datasnakes.Orthologs.Blast.blastn_comparative_genetics import CompGenBLASTn
from Datasnakes.Orthologs.Genbank.genbank import GenBank
from Datasnakes.Orthologs.Align.msa import MultipleSequenceAlignment as MSA
from Datasnakes.Orthologs.
# In a real situation a dictionary configuration from YAML files will be used
# However a dictionary can be manually set up by the user within the script
# See the config files in Manager/config or use data_management.py as an example
Management_config = Blast_config = GenBank_config = Alignment_config = {}

# Initialize the Project Manager
proj_mana = ProjectManagement(**Management_config)

# Initialize the BLAST tool
# Compose this class with the Project Manager
blast = CompGenBLASTn(proj_mana=proj_mana, **Management_config, **Blast_config)
blast.blast_config(blast.blast_human, 'Homo_sapiens', auto_start=True)

# Initialize the GenBank parser
# Compose this class with the BLAST tool
# Implicitly uses the Project Manager as well
genbank = GenBank(blast=blast, **Management_config, **GenBank_config)
# Use the Blast tool data to get the desired GenBank files
genbank.blast2_gbk_files(blast.org_list, blast.gene_dict)

# Initialize the Aligner
# Compose this class with the GenBank parser
# Implicitly uses the Project Manager and the BLAST tool as well
al = MSA(genbank=genbank, **Management_config, **Alignment_config)
al.align(Alignment_config['kwargs'])  # Underdeveloped

# TODO-ROB:  Develop Documentation for Phylogenetics class
```
Using Tools
------------
#### Using the Tools module
The tools module is a grouping of utilities used by our package.  While they could have be stored in each
modules util.py file, they were used and developed on a global scale, and hence required their own module.
Below is a list of submodules and a brief description:


#### Examples
```python
# Import a tools module
from Datasnakes.Tools.slackify.notify import Slackify

# Slack takes a config file thats already set up
# This tools sends a message to a Slack channel
Slackify()
```
See the documentation in the various Tools submodules.